Capabilities and Access (#83)
icpc/ccs-specs: Contest_API.md

The interface is implemented as a HTTP REST interface that outputs
information in [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) format

> ([RFC 7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)).

Author: Technically, we only said "should" for HTTPS before, and it only stands out b/c I made it a must for non-public data. :)

I've backed this out with a slight rewording, so it's still a should in this section and then a must for anything sensitive or requiring auth lower down. This ends up with a slight text duplication between these sections. If you prefer we could either make HTTPS a must for anything, or focus on all the cases that need HTTPS (auth, non-sensitive data, etc) and not mention that you could do HTTP for anything not on the list.

(And yeah, I know your feelings on REST ;-) )

When there is a failure using any method the response message body
must include a JSON object that contains the properties 'code' (a number,
identical to the HTTP status code returned) and 'message' (a string) with
further information suitable for the client making the request, as per the
following example:

```json
{"code":403,
 "message":"Teams cannot send clarifications to another team"}
 ```

### HTTPS and Authentication

> The API provider may allow HTTP or unauthenticated access for information

Author: HTTP is fine for public data, HTTPS just hides what you're looking at from snooping and makes it harder to sit in the middle. Just polled some common sites though, and doing everything over HTTPS does seem more common now, so as per previous comment we could make that requirement now.

that is fully public - i.e. may be visible to everyone including
spectators and teams. If provided this must be read-only access
(no `POST`, `PUT`, `PATCH` or `DELETE` methods allowed).

All other access to the API must be controlled via
authenticated accounts, and must be provided over HTTPS to guard against
eavesdropping on sensitive contest data and authentication credentials.

The API provider must support [HTTP basic
authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_access_authentication)
([RFC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7617)). This provides a standard
and flexible method; besides HTTP basic auth, other forms of
authentication can be offered as well.

Depending on the client account's access, some objects may be completely
hidden from the client, may omit certain properties, or may embargo or

> omit objects based on the current contest time.

Author: Fixed in new commit.

When there is a failure using any method the response message body
must include a JSON object that contains the properties 'code' (a number,
identical to the HTTP status code returned) and 'message' (a string) with
further information suitable for the client making the request, as per the
following example:

```json
{"code":403,
 "message":"Teams cannot send clarifications to another team"}
 ```

### Authentication

The API provider may allow unauthenticated access to public information,
but all other access to the API is controlled via authenticated accounts. 
The API provider must support [HTTP basic
authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_access_authentication)
([RFC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7617)). This provides a standard
and flexible method; besides HTTP basic auth, other forms of
authentication can be offered as well.

> Each provider must support at least the following kinds of accounts, although

Author: I don't really want to try changing that in this PR, but I agree that maybe it doesn't belong here (or maybe at even in the CCS' spec? The way we run finals I don't think we even use the CCS public access).

> Each provider must support at least the following kinds of accounts, although

Reviewer: Yeah let’s not change it now but discuss at a call

> Each provider must support at least the following kinds of accounts, although

Reviewer 2: I agree with both of you. I.e. we *should* (probably) do the change @nickygerritsen suggests, but we shouldn't do it in this PR.

> Each provider must support at least the following kinds of accounts, although

Author: Added to CLICS call agenda.

additional ones may be supported for specific uses:

  - public (default access: contest data that's available to everyone)
  - admin (data or capability only available to contest administrators)

Each kind of account may completely hide some objects from the client, may
omit certain properties, or may embargo or omit objects based on the

> current contest time. By default, the public client has read-only access

Author: Rewrote public access and auth section.

When there is a failure using any method the response message body
must include a JSON object that contains the properties 'code' (a number,
identical to the HTTP status code returned) and 'message' (a string) with
further information suitable for the client making the request, as per the
following example:

```json
{"code":403,
 "message":"Teams cannot send clarifications to another team"}
 ```

### Authentication

> The API provider may allow unauthenticated access for information

Reviewer 2: I think either works?

> that is fully public - i.e. may be visible to everyone including

Reviewer 2: I think either *works*, but comma is probably better.

spectators and teams. If provided this must be read-only access
(no `POST`, `PUT`, `PATCH` or `DELETE` methods allowed).

All other access to the API must be controlled via
authenticated accounts. The API provider must support [HTTP basic
authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_access_authentication)
([RFC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7617)). This provides a standard
and flexible method; besides HTTP basic auth, other forms of
authentication can be offered as well.

> Depending on the client account's access, some objects may be completely
> hidden from the client, may omit certain properties, or may embargo or
> omit objects based on the current state of the contest.

Reviewer 3: Small rewrite to active voice and with consistent subject/object:
```suggestion
Depending on the client account's access, the API provider may completely
hide some objects from the client, may omit certain properties, or may embargo or
omit objects based on the current state of the contest.
```

Reviewer 2: I actually don't think the active voice is better here. It's not that the server after careful consideration decides to hide some objects, but rather that given the capabilities (I almost said role) of the client and the state of the contest, some objects are (and should be) hidden.

Reviewer 3: FYI, my reason for using the active voice was mostly to make the sentence shorter, and I think, slightly easier to read. It's not meant to change any intented meaning/intonation. Also the original sentence was still written half/half in active/passive voice. I'm also fine with completely writing it in passive voice.

Author: I'm going to commit just b/c it makes the wording consistent. If anyone disagrees we can change the whole thing to passive voice.

and flexible method; besides HTTP basic auth, other forms of
authentication can be offered as well.

Depending on the client account's access, the API provider may completely

> hide some objects from the client, may omit certain properties, or may embargo or

Reviewer 2: I actually don't like this change...

}
```

### Capabilities

The API specifies several

> capabilities that define behaviours that clients can expect and

Reviewer 3: Use American English
```suggestion
capabilities that define behaviors that clients can expect and
```

actions they can perform. For instance, a team account will typically
have access to a "team_submit" capability that allows a team to perform
POST operations on the submissions endpoint, but doesn't allow it to
set the submission id or timestamp; an administrator may have access
to a "contest_start" capability that allows it to PATCH the start
time of the contest. These coarse-grained capabilities allow more
flexibility for contest administrators and tools to define capabilities

> that match the requirements of a specific contest - e.g. whether teams

Reviewer 3: This is really nitpicky, but I think a comma is better here, or at least more common. Also if used, should this be an em-dash (or an en-dash)?
```suggestion
that match the requirements of a specific contest, e.g. whether teams
```

}
```

### Capabilities

> Instead of strict role-based access control, this API defines several

Author: Fixed in new commit.

All event types correspond to an API endpoint, as specified in the table below.

> | Type            | API Endpoint                          |

Author: Yeah, I know. It is 'event type' and in the original context 'event' is better, but when referred to from /access I thought 'type' was a better fit to cover both. I didn't really want to move the table to somewhere common, can't think of any better option.

> | Type            | API Endpoint                          |

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's also a good point.

I can't think of a better option either.

Countdown is resumed by setting a new `start_time` and resetting
`countdown_pause_time` to `null`.

#### Contest capabilties

Clients with the `contest_start` [capability](#capabilities) have the ability to
set or clear the contest start time via a PATCH method.

The PATCH must include a valid JSON object with only two or three
properties allowed: the contest `id` (used for verification), a
`start_time` (a `<TIME>` value or `null`), and an optional
`countdown_pause_time` (`<RELTIME>`). As above, `countdown_pause_time`
can only be non-null when start time is null.

> The request should fail with a 401 error code if the client does not have the

Author: Agreed. This isn't changed by this PR, but maybe it should be something like a 405?

> The request should fail with a 401 error code if the client does not have the

Reviewer: 🤷‍♂️ Let’s also discuss later

> The request should fail with a 401 error code if the client does not have the

Author: Added to CLICS agenda.

Properties of endpoint objects:

| Name         | Type            | Required? | Nullable? | Description
| :----------- | :-------------- | :-------- | :-------- | :----------
| type         | string          | yes       | no        | The type of the endpoint, e.g. "problems". See table in [Notification format](#notification-format) for the list of types.
| properties   | array of string | yes       | no        | An array of supported properties that the current client has visibility to.

This endpoint provides information about what is accessible to a specific
client in a live contest, and hence will not exist in a contest archive.

This information is provided so that clients know what endpoints are available,
what notifications may happen, and what capabilities they have, regardless
of whether objects currently exist or the capability is currently active.
For instance, a client logged in with a team account would see the problems type and
team_submit capability before a contest starts, even through they cannot
see any problems nor submit yet.
Clients are not expected to call this endpoint more than once

> since the response would not normally change during a contest.

Reviewer 3: Maybe better to change "would" to "should" or even "must"?

Reviewer 2: Definitely not "must".

Reviewer: Agreed. If you somehow make a mistake with setting up capabilities for a user you should be able to fix that mistake without being illegal.

Author: Ditto, not 'must'. If you felt strongly I'd be ok with 'should', but otherwise I think this is ok.

Reviewer 3: Ok, I agree that "must" is too strong, but I think that changing it to "should" would be better, so that clients also have a soft guarantee that they don't need to query this endpoint more than once.

Author: Ok, changed.

file, i.e. there must not be extra directories (or files) added unless
these are explicitly part of the submission content.

> #### Submission capabilities 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I like renaming this sections (also above and below)

Author: I see your point, but I don't love using HTTP methods as section titles and think the document will be easier to scan if we have a standard pattern for each section that talks about any POST/PUT/PATCH/DELETE options. Maybe something like "Modifying submissions" (and e.g. "Modifying awards" in the future), or (since we have "Examples" for each type) leaving the type name out and use something like "Editing"?

Reviewer: I like your last two suggestions way more

Author: I just did a commit with a "Modifying x" pattern, partially b/c if I went with a single word I don't know how to link to each section in markdown.  ;-)

> To add a submission clients can use the `POST` method on the submissions endpoint or the

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: add a comma here for readability:
```suggestion
To add a submission, clients can use the `POST` method on the submissions endpoint or the
```

`PUT` method directly on an object url. One of the following [capabilities](#capabilities)
is required to add submissions:

| Name              | Description
| :---------------- | :----------
| team_submit       | POST a submissision as a team

> | proxy_submit      | POST a submission as a proxy (able to submit on behalf of a team)

Reviewer 3: For clarity, I'd propose
```suggestion
| proxy_submit      | POST a submission as a proxy (able to submit on behalf of any team)
```

Reviewer 2: This would precludes a proxy (i.e. an account) that has the right to submit for some, but not all, teams. This would make sense e.g. in the original use case we imagined for proxies, i.e. multi-site contests.

Author: Agreed. I hope neither of you want to add API for the proxy to tell which team(s) it can submit for? :)

In practise I think it's likely that we wouldn't have to restrict a proxy to a subset of teams b/c only the teams it can submit for will have either network or authentication access to it, but I agree we should't preclude this in the API. How about "on behalf of team(s)"? That implies it may be more than 1 but doesn't imply all teams.

Author: I was pushing another commit so I went with "team(s)", let me know if it works.

Reviewer 2: > hope neither of you want to add API for the proxy to tell which team(s) it can submit for? :)

Nope :).

> | admin_submit      | POST or PUT a submission as an admin

Reviewer 3: maybe add something along "This allows overriding submission id, team and time among other things"? Or refer to the explanation below on how this can be used?

Author: Added "descriptions below" above both tables.

* Since `files` only supports `application/zip`, providing the `mime` property is
  optional.
* `reaction` may be provided but a CCS does not have to honour it.
* The `team_submit` capability only has access to `POST`. `time`
  must not be provided and will always be set to the
  current time as determined by the server. `team_id` may be provided but then
  must match the ID of the team associated with the request.
* The `proxy_submit` capability also uses `POST` and lets the server
  determine the `id`. `team_id` must be provided but `time` must not and will be
  determined by the server.
* For more advanced scenarios the `admin_submit` capability may use a `POST` (must not

>   include an `id`) or `PUT` (client is required to include a unique `id`). In both

Reviewer 2: So if you have `proxy_submit` you may provide `id`in a POST (which feels wrong in itself. If you are deciding the `id` you should use a PUT not a POST), but `admin_submit` may not. This feels inconsistent.

I suggest that neither can include an `id` in their POST, but both are allowed to PUT with an `id`.

The response will contain a `Location` header pointing to the newly created submission
and the response body will contain the initial state of the submission.

> Performing a `POST` or `PUT` is not supported except when the capabilities are available.

Reviewer 3: Do we actually need to state this here, as it's already said at the top of this section?
If so, I think it would be better to write
```suggestion
Performing a `POST` or `PUT` is not supported when these capabilities are not available.
```
to remove the ambiguity that you might need more or all of these capabilities.

Reviewer 2: The rewrite is clearer. :+1:

I do think it makes sense to state this here though.

Note that at least one of `from_team_id` and `to_team_id` has to be
`null`. That is, teams cannot send messages to other teams.

#### Modifying clarifications

To add a clarification, clients can use the `POST` method on the clarifications endpoint or the
`PUT` method directly on an object url. One of the following [capabilities](#capabilities)
is required to add clarifications, with descriptions below:

| Name              | Description
| :---------------- | :----------
| team_clar         | POST a clarification as a team
| proxy_clar        | POST a clarification as a proxy (able to submit on behalf of team(s))
| admin_clar        | POST or PUT a clarification as an admin

All requests must include a valid JSON object with the same properties as the clarifications
endpoint returns from a `GET` request with the following exceptions:

* When a property value would be null it is optional - you do not need to include it.

>   e.g. if a clarification is not related to a problem you can chose to include or

Reviewer 3: Unrelated typo fix:
```suggestion
  e.g. if a clarification is not related to a problem you can choose to include or
```

  `contest_time` must not be provided. `from_team_id` may be provided but then
  must match the ID of the team associated with the request. The server will determine
  an `id` and the current `time` and `contest_time`.
* The `proxy_clar` capability only has access to `POST`. `id`, `to_team_id`, `time`, and
  `contest_time` must not be provided. `from_team_id` must be provided. The server will determine
  an `id` and the current `time` and `contest_time`.
* The `admin_clar` capability may use a `POST` (must not
  include an `id`) or `PUT` (client is required to include a unique `id`).
  In both cases `time` is required.

The request must fail with a 4xx error code if any of the following happens:

* A required property is missing.
* A property that must not be provided is provided.
* The supplied problem, from_team, to_team, or reply_to cannot be found or are not
  visible to the client that's submitting.
* The provided `id` already exists or is otherwise not acceptable.

The response will contain a `Location` header pointing to the newly created clarification
and the response body will contain the initial state of the clarification.

> Performing a `POST` or `PUT` is not supported except when the capabilities are available.

Reviewer 3: Same comment as for submit: do we need to state this again?

| proxy_clar        | POST a clarification as a proxy (able to submit on behalf of team(s))
| admin_clar        | POST or PUT a clarification as an admin

All requests must include a valid JSON object with the same properties as the clarifications
endpoint returns from a `GET` request with the following exceptions:

* When a property value would be null it is optional - you do not need to include it.
  e.g. if a clarification is not related to a problem you can chose to include or
  exclude the `problem_id`.
* The `team_clar` capability only has access to `POST`. `id`, `to_team_id`, `time`, and
  `contest_time` must not be provided. `from_team_id` may be provided but then
  must match the ID of the team associated with the request. The server will determine
  an `id` and the current `time` and `contest_time`.
* The `proxy_clar` capability also uses `POST` and lets the server
  determine the `id`. `team_id` must be provided but `to_team_id`, `time`, and
  `contest_time` must not and will be determined by the server.
* The `admin_clar` capability may use a `POST` (must not
  include an `id`) or `PUT` (client is required to include a unique `id`).

>   In both cases `time` is required.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as for submissions.
